Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsOff-The-Shelf Software Use inMedical DevicesGuidance for Industry andFood and Drug Administration StaffDocument issued on August 11, 2023.Document originally issued on September 9, 1999.This document supersedes Off-The-Shelf Software Use in Medical Devicesissued September 27, 2019.For questions about this document, contact the Digital Health Center of Excellence by e-mailat digitalhealth@fda.hhs.gov.U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesFood and Drug AdministrationCenter for Devices and Radiological HealthContains Nonbinding RecommendationsPublic CommentPrefaceYou may submit electronic comments and suggestions at any time for Agency consideration tohttps://www.regulations.gov. Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Staff, Foodand Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, Room 1061, (HFA-305), Rockville, MD 20852.Identify all comments with the docket number FDA-2019-D-3598. Comments may not be actedupon by the Agency until the document is next revised or updated.Additional CopiesAdditional copies are available from the Internet. You may also send an e-mail request toCDRH-Guidance@fda.hhs.gov to receive a copy of the guidance. Please use the documentnumber GUI00000585 and complete title of the guidance in the request.Contains Nonbinding RecommendationsTable of ContentsI. Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 4II. Scope....................................................................................................................................... 5III. OTS Software Documentation Elements.................................................................................. 6A. Description of OTS Software ............................................................................................... 7B. Risk Assessment of OTS Software....................................................................................... 9C. Software Testing as Part of Verification and Validation....................................................... 9D. Assurance of Development Methodologies and Continued Maintenance of OTS Software 10IV. OTS Software in Marketing Applications ............................................................................. 10A. Master Files for Devices (MAFs)....................................................................................... 11B. OTS Software Changes requiring a 510(k)......................................................................... 11C. Investigational Device Exemption and Changes to OTS Software ..................................... 11D. Premarket Approval and OTS Software ............................................................................. 12E. Product Labeling ................................................................................................................ 12Appendix A: General Considerations for OTS Software ............................................................. 13A. Maintenance and Obsolescence.......................................................................................... 13B. Operating Systems, Drivers, and Utilities........................................................................... 16C. Local Area Networks (LANs) and Other Networks............................................................ 17D. Innovative Technologies..................................................................................................... 18Appendix B: Examples................................................................................................................ 19Contains Nonbinding Recommendations4Off-The-Shelf Software Use inMedical DevicesGuidance for Industry andFood and Drug Administration StaffI. IntroductionOff-the-shelf (OTS) Software is commonly being considered for incorporation into medicaldevices as the use of general-purpose computer hardware becomes more prevalent. The use ofOTS Software in a medical device allows the manufacturer to concentrate on the applicationsoftware needed to run device-specific functions. However, OTS Software intended for generalpurpose computing may not be appropriate for a given specific use in a medical device. Themedical device manufacturer using OTS Software generally gives up software life cycle control,but still bears the responsibility for the continued safe and effective performance of the medicaldevice.This guidance document is intended to provide information regarding the recommendeddocumentation sponsors should include in a premarket submission for FDA’s evaluation of offthe-shelf (OTS) software1used in a medical device.2 The recommendations in this guidance arealso intended to facilitate FDA’s premarket review. This guidance describes information thatwould be typically generated and documented3during software development, verification, and1 The term off-the-shelf (OTS) software is defined in Section II (Scope).2 The term “device” is defined in 201(h)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic (FD&C) Act to include an“instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article,including any component, part, or accessory, which is intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions,or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, in man ... or intended to affect the structure or anyfunction of the body of man...” and “does not include software functions excluded pursuant to section 520(o)” of theFD&C Act.3 As a reminder, manufacturers of device software must create and maintain software-related documentation inaccordance with the requirements of the Quality System (QS) Regulation (21 CFR 820.30 Subpart C – DesignControls of the Quality System Regulation). On February 23, 2022, FDA proposed to amend the device QSregulation, 21 CFR part 820, to align more closely with international consensus standards for devices (87 FR 10119;available at https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/02/23/2022-03227/medical-devices-quality-systemregulation-amendments). Specifically, FDA proposed to withdraw the majority of the current requirements in part 820This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDAor Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not bindingon FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirementsof the applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact theFDA staff or Office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations5validation. The least burdensome approach was applied to identify the minimum amount ofinformation that, based on our experience, would generally be needed to support a premarketsubmission for a device that uses OTS software.The documentation recommended in this guidance is based on FDA’s experience evaluating thesafety and effectiveness for a device that uses OTS software. However, sponsors may usealternative approaches and provide different documentation so long as their approach anddocumentation satisfy premarket submission requirements in applicable statutory provisions andregulations.On September 27, 2019, this guidance was revised through a Level 2 update in accordance with the21st Century Cures Act, with the changes described in the guidance “Changes to Existing MedicalSoftware Policies Resulting from Section 3060 of the 21st Century Cures Act.”4 This guidance wasmost recently revised through a Level 2 update in addition to the documentation described inFDA’s final guidance titled “Content of Premarket Submissions for Device Software Functions.”5In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities.Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only asrecommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of theword should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but notrequired.II. ScopeThis guidance is intended to provide information regarding the recommended documentation in apremarket submission for a medical device that uses Off-the-Shelf software (OTS software),which is considered a generally available software component, used by a medical devicemanufacturer for which the manufacturer cannot claim complete software life cycle control (e.g.,operating system, printer/display libraries).For the purposes of this guidance, unless otherwise stated, the term premarket submissionincludes, but is not limited to, premarket notification (510(k)) submission, De Novo classificationrequest, Premarket Approval (PMA) application, Investigational Device Exemption (IDE), orHumanitarian Device Exemption (HDE).If the device is a multiple function device product and includes software function(s) that areconsidered “other functions,” as that term is used in the guidance “Multiple Function Deviceand instead incorporate by reference the 2016 edition of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)13485, Medical devices- Quality management systems for regulatory purposes, in part 820. As stated in that proposedrule, the requirements in ISO 13485 are, when taken in totality, substantially similar to the requirements of the currentpart 820, providing a similar level of assurance in a firm’s quality management system and ability to consistentlymanufacture devices that are safe and effective and otherwise in compliance with the FD&C Act. FDA intends tofinalize this proposed rule expeditiously. When the final rule takes effect, FDA will also update the references toprovisions in 21 CFR part 820 in this guidance to be consistent with that rule.4 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/changes-existing-medicalsoftware-policies-resulting-section-3060-21st-century-cures-act.5 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/content-premarketsubmissions-device-software-functions.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations6Product: Policy and Considerations,”6the recommendations described in the aforementionedguidance should be considered when preparing the software documentation for a premarketsubmission.III. OTS Software Documentation ElementsAs discussed in the guidance titled “Content of Premarket Submissions for Device SoftwareFunctions,”7the recommended documentation for a premarket submission depends on thedevice’s risk to a patient, a user of a device, or others in the environment of use. FDA intends totake a risk-based approach to help determine the device’s Documentation Level, which is eitherBasic8or Enhanced.9 The purpose of the Documentation Level is to help identify the minimumamount of information that would support a premarket submission that includes device softwarefunctions. The Documentation Level of a device is based on the risks of its device softwarefunction(s) in the context of the device’s intended use,10 such that the documentation level reflectsthe device as a whole.For the purposes of this guidance, Table 1 below provides an outline of the recommendeddocumentation for each OTS software documentation element and corresponding DocumentationLevel as determined in the “Content of Premarket Submissions for Device Software Functions”11for the device software function. Please refer to subsections A-D in this section of the guidancefor more detail.Table 1. Outline of Recommended DocumentationSoftwareDocumentationElementsBasic Documentation Level Enhanced Documentation LevelDescription ofOTS Software(Section III.A)An overview and description of the OTS software and actions taken for thecontinued safe and effective use of the medical device.Risk Assessmentof OTS Software(Section III.B)Risk assessment demonstrating that risks related to the use of OTS softwarehave been appropriately mitigated.6 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/multiple-function-deviceproducts-policy-and-considerations.7 See footnote 5.8 The documentation level provided for any premarket submission that includes device software function(s) whereEnhanced Documentation does not apply.9 The documentation level provided for any premarket submission that includes device software function(s), where afailure or flaw of any device software function(s) could present a hazardous situation with a probable risk of death orserious injury, either to a patient, user of the device, or others in the environment of use. These risks should beassessed prior to implementation of risk control measures. Sponsors should consider the risks in the context of thedevice’s intended use (e.g., impacts to safety, treatment, and/or diagnosis), and other relevant considerations.10 See 21 CFR 801.4.11 See footnote 5.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations7SoftwareDocumentationElementsBasic Documentation Level Enhanced Documentation LevelSoftware Testingas part ofVerification andValidation(Section III.C)Test plans and results for the OTS software, commensurate with theDocumentation Level (i.e., Basic or Enhanced) for the device.Assurance ofDevelopmentMethodologiesand ContinuedMaintenance ofOTS Software(Section III.D)FDA is not recommending thisdocumentation as part of thepremarket submission. Sponsorsshould document thisinformation via the DHF for thedevice. During premarketreview, FDA may requestadditional information, ifneeded, to evaluate the safetyand effectiveness of the device.Information to provide an assurance thatthe product development methodologiesused by the OTS software developer areappropriate and sufficient, andmechanisms exist for assuring thecontinued performance, maintenance,and support of the OTS software.A. Description of OTS SoftwareFor both Basic and Enhanced Documentation Levels as discussed in the guidance titled “Contentof Premarket Submissions for Device Software Functions,”12 an overview and description of theOTS software features and functions should be provided. Sponsors should consider and, asapplicable, provide information to address the questions below when preparing the OTS softwaredescription. However, FDA recognizes that these questions and examples may not capture all theunique aspects of the device software and encourages the inclusion of additional information thatwill further FDA’s understanding of the device’s functionality to facilitate the review of asubmission.1. What is it?For each component of OTS software used, the following should be specified:· Title and Manufacturer of the OTS software.· Version Level, Release Date, Patch Number, and Upgrade Designation, as appropriate.· Any OTS software documentation that will be provided to the end user.· Why is this OTS software appropriate for this medical device?· What are the expected design limitations of the OTS software?Note: The sponsor should only use the OTS software as specified in an appropriate document(i.e., design history file). If the version of the OTS software changes, the appropriate document12 See footnote 5.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations8should be updated to reflect the change.2. What are the Computer System Specifications for the OTS Software?For what configuration will the OTS software be validated? The following should be specified:· Hardware specifications: processor (manufacturer, speed, and features), RAM (memory size),hard disk size, other storage, communications, display, etc.· Software specifications: operating system, drivers, utilities, etc. The software requirementsspecification (SRS) listing for each item should contain the name (such as Microsoft WindowsOperating System, Microsoft Windows Drivers, etc.), specific version levels (such as 4.1, 5.0,etc.) and a complete list of any patches that have been provided by the OTS softwaremanufacturer.3. How will you assure appropriate actions are taken by the End User?The following should be specified:· What aspects of the OTS software and system can (and/or must) be installed/configured?· What steps are permitted (or must be taken) to install and/or configure the product?· How often will the configuration need to be changed?· What education and training are suggested or required for the user of the OTS software?· What measures have been designed into the medical device to prevent the operation of anynon-specified OTS software (e.g., word processors, games)? Operation of non-specified OTSsoftware may be prevented by system design, preventive measures, or labeling. Introductionmay be prevented by disabling input (USB, CD, modems).4. What does the OTS Software do?What function does the OTS Software provide in this device? The following should be specified:· What is the OTS software intended to do? The sponsor’s design documentation should specifyexactly which OTS components will be included in the design of the medical device and towhat extent OTS software is involved in error control and messaging in device error control.· What are the links with other software including software outside the medical device (notreviewed as part of this or another application)? The links to outside software should becompletely defined for each medical device/module. The design documentation should includea complete description of the linkage between the medical device software and any outsidesoftware (e.g., networks).5. How do you know it works?· Based on documentation Level (i.e., Basic or Enhanced) determined for the devicesoftware as discussed in the guidance titled “Content of Premarket Submissions forDevice Software Functions,”13 sponsors should: Describe testing, verification, andvalidation of the OTS Software and ensure it is appropriate for the device hazards13 See footnote 5.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations9associated with the OTS Software.· Provide the results of the testing.· Is there a current list of OTS Software problems (bugs) and access to updates?For more information on software testing, verification, and validation, please see sectionIII.C.6. How will you keep track of (control14) the OTS Software?An appropriate plan should answer the following questions:· What measures have been designed into the medical device to prevent the introduction ofincorrect versions? On startup, ideally, the medical device should check to verify that allsoftware is the correct title, version level, and configuration. If the correct software is notloaded, the medical device should warn the operator and shut down to a safe state.· How will you maintain the OTS software configuration?· Where and how will you store the OTS software?· How will you ensure proper installation of the OTS software?· How will you ensure proper maintenance and life cycle support for the OTS software?B. Risk Assessment of OTS SoftwareAs discussed in the guidance titled “Content of Premarket Submissions for Device SoftwareFunctions,”15 a risk management file should be provided as part of a device software premarketsubmission. For both Basic and Enhanced Documentation Levels this should include a riskmanagement plan. It should be clear in the risk management plan how the sponsor plans toevaluate the overall residual risk. In addition, the risk management file should also include a riskassessment demonstrating that risks have been appropriately mitigated, and a risk managementreport. For OTS software, the risks associated with the functions of the OTS software used in thedevice should be documented in the risk management file.For more information on risk management files, please refer to the FDA guidance titled “Contentof Premarket Submissions for Device Software Functions.”C. Software Testing as Part of Verification andValidationSponsors should include documentation regarding test plans and test results as part of theverification and validation activities for the OTS software. Testing activities include not onlythose performed by the OTS software developer, but also include those performed by the sponsorwhen qualifying the OTS software for its use in the specific medical device. Commensurate withthe Documentation Level (i.e., Basic or Enhanced) determined for the device software as14 As discussed in 21 CFR 820.50 (Purchasing controls), each manufacturer shall establish and maintain procedures toensure that all purchased or otherwise received product and services conform to specified requirements.15 See footnote 5.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations10discussed in the guidance titled “Content of Premarket Submissions for Device SoftwareFunctions,” sponsors should:· Describe testing of the OTS software and demonstrate it is appropriate and adequate forthe hazards associated with the OTS software as documented in the risk management file.o Note: FDA recommends that software test plans identify the exact OTS software(title and version) that is to be used. When the software is tested, it should beintegrated and tested using the specific OTS software. Testing activities includethose performed by the sponsor when qualifying the OTS software for its use in thespecific medical device but may also include those performed by the OTS softwaredeveloper.· Provide the results of the testing.o Note: If the sponsor allows the use of the medical device with different versions ofOTS software, then the sponsor should validate the medical device for each OTSsoftware version.· Provide a current list of OTS software defects.16D. Assurance of Development Methodologies andContinued Maintenance of OTS SoftwareGenerally, the following recommendations for premarket documentation are applicable todevices with Enhanced Documentation, where controls17 address the use of OTS software:1. Provide assurance to the FDA that the product development methodologies used by theOTS software developer are appropriate and sufficient for the intended use of the OTSsoftware within the specific medical device. For example, this may include a review of theOTS software developer’s design and development methodologies used in the constructionof the OTS software. This review should thoroughly assess the development andqualification documentation generated for the OTS software. If such an assurance is notpossible, and if the residual risk evaluation of the hazardous situation after implementedrisk control measures is not acceptable as defined in the risk management plan, the use ofsuch OTS software may not be appropriate for the intended medical device application.2. Demonstrate the existence of appropriate mechanisms for assuring the continuedperformance, maintenance and support of the OTS software should the original OTSsoftware developer either make changes to the OTS software and/or terminate theirsupport of the OTS software.IV. OTS Software in Marketing ApplicationsThe following recommendations are made available to help sponsors consider the use of OTSsoftware as it relates to existing regulatory mechanisms and pathways.16 For additional information on unresolved software anomalies, please refer to the FDA guidance titled “Content ofPremarket Submissions for Device Software Functions” available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatoryinformation/search-fda-guidance-documents/content-premarket-submissions-device-software-functions.17 As discussed in 21 CFR 820.50 (Purchasing controls), each manufacturer shall establish and maintain procedures toensure that all purchased or otherwise received product and services conform to specified requirements.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations11A. Master Files for Devices (MAFs)Much of the information regarding development and validation of OTS software may not bereadily available to the medical device manufacturer who wishes to use the OTS software as adevice component. Commercial OTS software vendors who wish to make their OTS softwareavailable for use in medical devices, but do not want to share the confidential and/orproprietary details of their software development and validation with customers (medicaldevice manufacturers), may direct the information in a device master file to the FDA. Formore information on Master Files for Devices, please refer to the FDA Master File website.18B. OTS Software Changes requiring a 510(k)The conditions under which a new or changed medical device including OTS software willrequire a new 510(k) are the same as for a device not involving OTS software. The decision asto whether a new 510(k) is required depends on the intended use of the device; the function ofthe OTS software; and to what extent the risks due to OTS software have been mitigated.These conditions are given in the FDA guidances, “Deciding When to Submit a 510(k) for aChange to an Existing Device,”19 and “Deciding When to Submit a 510(k) for a SoftwareChange to an Existing Device.”20C. Investigational Device Exemption and Changes toOTS SoftwareThe requirements for an investigational device exemption (IDE) are the same whether or notthe medical device contains OTS software. The OTS software may be a component of amedical device or the OTS software may be the entire medical device, e.g., diagnosticsoftware. The conditions that would require submission of an IDE are specified in section 21CFR 812 and generally include changes to OTS software during an IDE study that wouldaffect the patient population for which the medical device is intended; conditions of use of thedevice (including those recommended or suggested in the labeling or advertising; the probablebenefit from the use of the device weighed against any probable injury or illness from suchuse); or the reliability of the medical device.21Some specific issues related to OTS software might include initial (beta) testing of an OTSsoftware medical device in clinical studies. Such a study must comply with applicable IDErequirements.22 For non-significant risk medical devices, that includes approval by an18 Available at https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/premarket-approval-pma/master-files.19 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/deciding-when-submit510k-change-existing-device.20 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/deciding-when-submit510k-software-change-existing-device.21 For more information on changes during clinical study please see FDA Guidance titled Changes or ModificationsDuring the Conduct of a Clinical Investigation, available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fdaguidance-documents/changes-or-modifications-during-conduct-clinical-investigation-final-guidance-industry-andcdrh.22 See 21 CFR 812.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations12institutional review board (IRB) and patient informed consent. For significant risk studies, theinitial user testing (beta testing) protocol would be included in an IDE submission. Forexample, beta testing of radiation treatment planning software, including any OTS softwaremodules, would be conducted under a full IDE with FDA approval as a prerequisite. See theguidance on “Significant Risk and Nonsignificant Risk Medical Device Studies”23 for moreinformation.D. Premarket Approval and OTS SoftwareThe criteria and requirements for premarket approval (PMA) applications are discussed insection 21 CFR 814. When a manufacturer submits a PMA submission for a medical device,there must be valid scientific evidence (including clinical evidence, if needed) to support areasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness of the device.24The OTS software used in a medical device is evaluated in the context of the overall medicaldevice. The extent to which the medical device manufacturer ensures that the OTS softwarewas developed using appropriate life cycle control depends upon the overall risk of the medicaldevice, the role of the OTS software, and the probable risk of death or serious injury,25 either toa patient, user of the device, or others in the environment of use, associated with possiblefailures or flaw of the OTS software component.26E. Product LabelingFDA recommends that the user’s manual specify the version(s) of the OTS software that can beused with the medical device. Such specification would not be needed for embedded software(i.e., the user does not select the OTS software and cannot change the software provided by themedical device manufacturer).The user’s manual should contain appropriate warnings to the user indicating that the use of anysoftware other than those specified will violate the safety, effectiveness, and design controls ofthe medical device and that such use may result in an increased risk to users and patients. Formore information on medical device labeling, please see FDA website “Device Labeling”27 as wellas relevant guidance documents titled “Device Labeling Guidance #G91-1 (Blue Book Memo)”28 and Labeling – Regulatory Requirements for Medical Devices (FDA 89-4203).2923 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/significant-risk-andnonsignificant-risk-medical-device-studies.24 See 21 CFR 860.7.25 Serious injury, as defined in 21 CFR 803.3(w), is an injury or illness that: 1) is life threatening, 2) results inpermanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body structure, or 3) necessitates medical orsurgical intervention to preclude permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body structure.Permanent is defined as irreversible impairment or damage to a body structure or function, excluding trivialimpairment or damage.26 For more information, please see the FDA guidance Content of Premarket Submissions for Device SoftwareFunctions, available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/contentpremarket-submissions-device-software-functions.27 Available at https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/overview-device-regulation/device-labeling.28 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/device-labelingguidance-g91-1-blue-book-memo.29 Available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/labeling-regulatoryrequirements-medical-devices-fda-89-4203.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations13OTS Software labeling should indicate the minimum hardware platforms on which the softwareis validated to run (e.g., processor, memory, interface). The appropriate testing for the user toassure proper installation should also be described in the labeling.If the hardware on which the OTS software runs is a stand-alone computer and the user is not“locked out” by hardware or software system features, then the user should be warned againstinstalling any other software (utilities or applications programs) on the computer.Appendix A: General Considerations for OTS SoftwareThe purpose of this Appendix is to provide background information and general topic areassponsors may want to consider when preparing a premarket submission for FDA’s evaluationof OTS software used in a medical device. While these various topics may not be applicable toall OTS software, FDA believes that this remains pertinent information for sponsors toconsider.A. Maintenance and ObsolescenceMaintenance activities are generally considered to begin after the establishment anddistribution of a medical device product baseline. The distinction between maintenance andproduct development is an important one. Product development design activities generally leadto a system structure of highly integrated components and logic. Maintenance activitiesintroduce changes into this structure that may lead to a loss in the integrity of the structure.Structure integrity may be affected through changes due to new design requirements,corrections, or environmental adaptations. These types of changes may impact the integrity ofthe structure organization, architecture, logic, integration, or any combination of thesecharacteristics. Maintenance of products with OTS software components may be particularlyproblematic for reasons discussed in the main body of this document (i.e., the sponsor does nothave control of the OTS software component life cycle process).In particular, this section identifies general safety and effectiveness, design, software testing asa part of verification/validation, change, installation, and decommissioning concerns. Theseconcerns may be applied to all regulated medical device software and stand-alone medicalsoftware devices. The appropriate evaluation will depend on the probable risk of death orserious injury, either to a patient, user of the device, or others in the environment of use.Each concern below corresponds to a product development life cycle phase. The concernsidentify fundamental maintenance concerns relevant to medical devices that include software.Generally, when considering these topics, sponsors should follow the Quality SystemRegulations (21 CFR Part 820), which include requirements for Design Control (21 CFR820.30) and Corrective and Preventive action (21 CFR 820.100).(1) SafetyIntroduction of new or modified OTS software component(s) to a product baseline may impactthe safety of the product. Therefore, a safety impact assessment of the medical device shouldbe performed, and associated hazards documented in a Risk Management File. For moreinformation on risk management files, please refer to the FDA guidance titled “Content ofContains Nonbinding Recommendations14Premarket Submissions for Device Software Functions.” Traceability between these identifiedhazards, their design requirements, and test reports should be provided.Analysis should include the review of release bulletins (known error reports), user manuals,specifications, patches, and literature and internet searches for other user’s experience with theOTS software component(s).The submission should answer the following questions:· Has a risk assessment with traceability to requirements and test reports been provided?· Are safety functions isolated from new OTS software component(s)?· Does the new OTS software component(s) affect system safety integrity?· What new human factors conditions are introduced with new OTS softwarecomponent(s)?(2) DesignIntroduction of new or modified OTS software component(s) to a product baseline may impactthe original design of the product. This impact may result from necessary changes to theproduct structure organization, architecture, logic, integration, or a combination of thesecharacteristics.Problems attributable to structural changes include:· New system resource requirements, such as shared and/or fixed memory;· New timing considerations;· New memory organization (e.g., 16 bit to 32 bit to 64 bit words), partitioning;· New human factor issues;· New data integrity issues; and· New software required to create the final code (build tools).Consequently, the submission should answer the following questions:· How will the new OTS software component(s) change the performancecharacteristics?· How will the new OTS software component(s) change the operational environment?· Is data integrity preserved?(3) Software Testing as Part of Verification and ValidationAs in the establishment of a product baseline, verification and validation (V&V) activitiesshould occur when maintenance changes are made to a product baseline. Analysis of thesechanges directs necessary V&V activities. New OTS software component(s) in a productbaseline introduce unknown logic paths and complexities into the product. “Black-box” testingof OTS software component(s) may allow some validation claims to be made. However, theunknown logic paths and complexities of OTS software component(s) make it important toknow that design structure or logic elsewhere in the system is not impacted. This means a fullsystem regression test should be performed. Results of these testing activities should beContains Nonbinding Recommendations15documented. For more information on software testing as part of verification and validation,please refer to the FDA guidance titled “Content of Premarket Submissions for DeviceSoftware Functions.”The submission should answer the following questions:· Do test reports provide objective evidence that identified OTS software componenthazards have been addressed?· Do test reports provide objective evidence that all identified system hazards havebeen addressed?· Has a system regression test been performed?(4) InstallationChanges in a product baseline structure resulting from the integration of new OTS softwarecomponent(s) may impact installation requirements. This impact can range from minordocumentation changes to field upgrades. The sponsor should ascertain the impact of OTSsoftware component changes on fielded products.The submission should answer the following question: What is the impact of new OTS softwarecomponent(s) on fielded medical device products? For example, do new OTS softwarecomponent(s) correctly operate within the specifications of medical devices currently fielded?(5) ObsolescenceRapid technology changes, economics, and market demand are shrinking product life spans. Adirect consequence of these phenomena is that an OTS software component today may not existtwo years from now. Short life spans are a particular characteristic of software because it isrelatively easy to change. Obsolescence of OTS software component(s) can have significantimpact on regulated products because the device manufacturer may lose the ability to properlysupport fielded products. The sponsor needs to support fielded medical device products withOTS software components.The submission should answer the following questions:· Will the old OTS software component(s) still be available for fielded medical devices?· Is there a retirement plan for OTS software component(s) to be replaced/eliminated?· Do new OTS software component(s) replace fielded components?(6) Product ConfigurationThe submission must identify the product to be considered. Therefore, the product configurationprovided should specify:· Hardware platform (e.g., microprocessor, minimum memory required,addressable word size);· Software platform (such as operating system, communications, databases,necessary utilities, etc.);· OTS component(s) other than Utilities and Drivers (Appendix A, Section B) aboveContains Nonbinding Recommendations16(see recommended content discussed in the main body of this document); and· Internally developed application(s).B. Operating Systems, Drivers, and UtilitiesThe operating system software is the primary software program that manages the basicfunctions of the computer and its associated hardware, including peripherals. The operatingsystem provides a basic user interface, is responsible for managing applications programs andtasks, controlling memory allocation and data storage devices, and providing input/output forthe computer, as well as any additional peripheral devices that are present.“Open” hardware (mass market) architecture computers vary widely in architectural andorganizational characteristics such as timing, addressing, and processing. Operating systemsand application software executing on these platforms should be “robust” enough to performappropriately in this environment.OTS operating systems are commonly considered for incorporation into medical devices as theuse of general-purpose computer hardware becomes more prevalent. The use of OTS operatingsystem software allows device manufacturers to concentrate on the application software neededto run device-specific functions. However, an OTS operating system software is intended forgeneral-purpose computing and may not be appropriate for a given specific use in a medicaldevice. Developers of OTS operating systems typically design their systems for generalpurpose business or consumer computing environments and tasks where software failures anderrors are more accepted. This acceptability of errors in the general- purpose computingenvironment may make the OTS operating system software inappropriate for less error-tolerantenvironments or applications.The incorporation of OTS operating system software may also introduce unnecessary functionsand complexity into a medical device. General-purpose functional requirements typically resultin the OTS operating system software being large and unwieldy in the attempt to incorporatemore functionality into the operating system. This excess functionality is typically never usedfor specific medical device applications and increases the likelihood that errors may beintroduced into the operating system. The basic functions of an OTS operating systems used formedical device applications are typically the graphical user interface environment and thehardware interface functions. There are a number of operating systems used for timing- orresource-critical applications that provide the basic functionality needed to support user andhardware interfaces, but do not have many of the disadvantages of general-purpose business orconsumer operating systems.OTS driver software packages provide interface functions between the CPU, operating system,and the input/output peripheral. However, the performance and functionality of the OTS driversoftware may be affected by the overall system configuration and the OTS hardware. In mostcases, a particular software driver derives from a particular interface protocol and contains thedata signals, control signals, and timing signals for proper operation.Since tests for most input/output interface/bus configurations require the particular bus analysisor logic analysis, scope, and knowledge of the particular interface protocol, the validationprocess for the OTS driver software package should be part of the system interface validationContains Nonbinding Recommendations17process. This includes the verification of the data values in both directions for the data signals;various mode settings for the control signals in both directions (if applicable); and theinput/output interrupt and timing functions of the driver with the CPU and operating system.Utility software is generally designed to work with a specific operating system. Unlikeapplications software, utility software is intended to supplant or enhance functions typicallyperformed by the operating system. Examples of utility programs are memory managers, filemanagers, and virus checkers. Networking software can also be considered as utility software inthat it allows multiple computers to access the same resources. Operating systems can also bedesigned to support or enable network operations without any additional utility software.OTS utility software packages can perform the following functions: math functions (fastFourier transform, sin, cos); display functions (graphic); management functions (copy, delete,store various computer data/files); and the data manipulation function (transfer from oneBoolean type or both). The validation for these types of the software should be appropriate tothe probable risk of death or serious injury, either to a patient, user of the device, or others inthe environment of use as it pertains to use with a medical device.C. Local Area Networks (LANs) and Other NetworksMedical devices, particularly multi-parameter patient monitors and imaging systems, areincreasingly networked for clinical work groups, centralized monitoring, and storage of patientmedical data and records. LANs and other networks support more and more communication andsharing of images, measurement data, audio, video, graphics, text, etc. This heterogeneousmedia environment comes at a cost of more processing power, higher bandwidth or networkspeed, sophisticated object-relational databases, and security and access considerations.The evaluation of networked medical devices begins with a definition of the technicalrequirements of the network application and the understanding of those requirements.(1) Requirements AnalysisB. Speed – The response time required for safe and effective operation determines the LANdata rate (bandwidth) for the medical device system. The CPU processing power and clockspeed required at device monitors, workstations, and client machines should be appropriate sothat bottlenecks do not occur.C. LAN Architecture – The size of the LAN (the number of user nodes) and the topology ofthe LAN should be specified.1. Discuss to what extent the LAN needs to be fault tolerant (e.g., when aworkstation fails).2. Discuss to what extent the LAN needs to be scalable (i.e., can new user nodes beadded without degrading system performance?).3. Discuss to what extent the main device software needs to be computationally selfsufficient or distributed.D. Network Operating System (NOS) – Whether OTS or proprietary, this selectionshould consider the trade-off between robustness and flexibility.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations18E. Data Integrity – One of the most important issues for any medical device operating in anetwork is data integrity. The manufacturer should ensure that the network system softwareand hardware incorporate error checking, handling, and correction measures as determined by acybersecurity risk assessment.1. Transmission of data packets and files should include error detectionand protection measures, such as digital signatures or cryptographicintegrity checks.2. Transaction rollback after non-committed changes or network failure,supports data integrity in medical device LANs.3. Critical data and files may be stored in duplicate at separate locations.F. Network Management and Security – User authorization and authenticationshould precede accesses to sensitive patient information.The above five items are not independent. Decisions made in one item area may affect theperformance of the LAN in another area.(2) ImplementationThe speed required by the medical device system dictates the hardware selection, the networkinterface cards and transmissions protocols. For example, if the conventional Ethernet protocolis too slow for the intended application, then a different transmission protocol will be needed.Simplicity of the LAN architecture versus fault tolerance is a trade-off that may arise in theimplementation of the networked medical device systems. The LAN could be implemented asa linear bus network (perhaps the simplest scheme), but if any connecting link on the bus fails,the whole network can fail. A star topology with redundant centralized hub is an example of amore complex but more robust network structure.Segmentation of high bandwidth applications may be employed to improve LAN performance.Limiting the data traffic to data intensive clusters reduces traffic throughout the overall LAN.D. Innovative TechnologiesFDA recognizes OTS Software can perform advanced functions, which may involve the use ofinnovative technologies, such as artificial intelligence and machine learning. Relevantrecommendations regarding the use of these advanced functions and their unique considerationswill continue to evolve and become available through FDA guidance. The latest FDA guidancedocuments are available on FDA webpages, such as the Digital Health Center of Excellence’sGuidances with Digital Health Content.3030 Available at https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/digital-health-center-excellence/guidances-digital-healthcontent.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations19Appendix B: ExamplesExamples of medical devices using OTS software are described in this section. This list ofexamples is intended to illustrate the reasoning that leads to determining Documentation Levelfor a medical device and the corresponding OTS documentation recommended in a premarketsubmission. Please note that these generalized examples do not necessarily account for everypossible detail, risk, or consideration a sponsor should evaluate. These examples do not definethe appropriate Documentation Level for a particular device type or the corresponding OTSdocumentation to be included in a premarket submission. The rationales in the examples beloware abbreviated and FDA encourages sponsors to provide a detailed assessment that accountsfor the specifics of their device, including its corresponding OTS.(1) A traumatic brain injury (TBI) eye movement assessment aidDescription: The device is a prescription device that is intended to track a patient’s eyemovements using a commercial OTS mobile phone and camera and analyze the tracked eyemovements to aid in the assessment of mild TBI, commonly known as “concussion.” Thedevice provides a positive or negative indicator about the presence of eye movements that areconsistent with mild TBI.Example OTS Software: An OTS operating system on the mobile platform.OTS Software Documentation: A failure or latent flaw of the device software function(s)would not present a hazardous situation with a probable risk of death or serious injury to eithera patient, user of the device, or others in the environment of use, prior to the implementation ofrisk control measures. The device is intended for use as an aid in the assessment of mild (nonsevere) injury and is not intended as a standalone diagnostic. Therefore, since the device has aBasic Documentation Level,31 the OTS Software Documentation will follow the BasicDocumentation Level in this guidance.(2) A device software function on a commercial OTS head-mounted display(e.g., augmented reality/virtual reality/mixed reality (AR/VR/MR)) thatsuperimposes pre-surgical images on a patient’s bodyDescription: The device is intended to provide real-time superimposition of medical imageson the patient during a surgical procedure, but is neither intended to directly guide surgicalplanning or procedures nor be worn by the lead surgeon.Example OTS Software: An OTS on-board processing and operating system.OTS Software Documentation: A failure or latent flaw of the device software function(s)would not present a hazardous situation with a probable risk of death or serious injury to eithera patient, user of the device, or others in the environment of use prior to the implementation ofrisk control measures, since the device is neither intended to directly guide surgical planning orprocedures nor be worn by the lead surgeon. Therefore, since the device has a Basic31 See Example #6 in Appendix A of the FDA Guidance Content of Premarket Submissions for Device SoftwareFunctions, available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/contentpremarket-submissions-device-software-functions.Contains Nonbinding Recommendations20Documentation Level,32 the OTS Software Documentation will follow the BasicDocumentation Level in this guidance.(3) A retinal diagnostic software deviceDescription: The device is limited to prescription use and incorporates an AI/ML-enabledalgorithm that is intended to evaluate images for diagnostic screening to identify retinaldiseases or conditions.Example OTS Software: OTS cloud-based platforms and operating systems on localcomputers.OTS Software Documentation: A failure or latent flaw of the device software function(s),such as a diagnostic algorithm failure that provides a false result, could present a hazardoussituation with a probable risk of death or serious injury to the patient prior to theimplementation of risk control measures. Therefore, since the device has an EnhancedDocumentation Level,33 the OTS Software Documentation will follow the EnhancedDocumentation Level in this guidance.32 See Example #11 in Appendix A of the FDA Guidance Content of Premarket Submissions for Device SoftwareFunctions, available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/contentpremarket-submissions-device-software-functions.33 See Example #25 in Appendix A of the FDA Guidance Content of Premarket Submissions for Device SoftwareFunctions, available at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-infor